# Disaster Relief Pipeline
Repository for Udacity Data Scientist Nanodegree disaster relief pipeline project.
Partnered with Figure Eight who are providing prelabelled tweets and text messages from real natural
disasters in a number of datasets. The task is to prepare this data with an ETL pipeline and then an
ML pipeline to build a  supervised learning model. 

Following a disaster, typically millions of communications when the response organisations have the
least capacity to handle it. Typically it is only every 1 in every 1000 messages that are relevant
to a given disaster response professional. Each Disaster response organisation typically focusses on
one key area of the disaster, such as water, blocked roads, medical supplies. The data contains
\these categories and the datasets have been combined and relabelled so that categories are
consistent across the data.

Example: The keyword ‘water’ rarely maps to someone who needs fresh drinking water and will also
miss people who say ‘thirsty’ but don’t use the word water. Supervised ML will be a lot more
accurate than a keyword search for this use-case. This is a big gap in disaster response contexts.

# Project Components
1. ETL Pipeline
In a Python script, process_data.py, write a data cleaning pipeline that:
    - Loads the messages and categories datasets
    - Merges the two datasets
    - Cleans the data
    - Stores it in an SQLite database

2. ML Pipeline
In a Python script, train_classifier.py, write a machine learning pipeline that:
    - Loads data from the SQLite database
    - Splits the dataset into training and test sets
    - Builds a text processing and machine learning pipeline
    - Trains and tunes a model using GridSearchCV
    - Outputs results on the test set
    - Exports the final model as a pickle file

3. Flask Web App
We are providing much of the flask web app for you, but feel free to add extra features depending on
your knowledge of flask, HTML, CSS and javascript. For this part, you'll need to:
    - Modify file paths for database and model as needed
    - Add data visualizations using Plotly in the web app. One example is provided for you

4. Github and Code Quality
Your project will also be graded based on the following:
    - Use of Git and Github
    - Strong documentation
    - Clean and modular code

Follow the RUBRIC when you work on your project to assure you meet all of the necessary criteria for
developing the pipelines and web app.

### Instructions:
1. Run the following commands in the project's root directory to set up your database and model.

    - To run ETL pipeline that cleans data and stores in database
        `python data/process_data.py data/disaster_messages.csv data/disaster_categories.csv data/DisasterResponse.db`
    - To run ML pipeline that trains classifier and saves
        `python models/train_classifier.py data/DisasterResponse.db models/classifier.pkl`

2. Run the following command in the app's directory to run your web app.
    `python run.py`

3. Go to http://0.0.0.0:3001/

# Installation 
Additional library requirements can be found in 'requirements.txt'.
Python 3.* should allow the code to run without issues

# Project Motivation
For this project I was interested in international health statistics to better understand:
1. What factors most affect life expectancy?
2. What countries of the world have the highest and lowest life expectancy? Why?
3. Can life expectancy be predicted based on the data available here?

# File Descriptions
.ipynb files: Features all actual working code
vis directory: Contains .json files of plotly visualisations generated in jupyter notebooks
Life_Expectancy_Data.csv obtained from Kaggle (see acknowledgements)
Life_Expectancy_Data_Cleaned.csv generated by jupyter notebooks, is the cleaned version of Life_Expectancy_Data.csv
requirements.txt: Python library requirements to run the notebooks within this repository
life_expectancy_data_profiling_report.html: Generated by pandas_profiling library. Summarises columns in dataset

# Results
The results of this analysis can be found in a blog post here:
https://medium.com/@jacob.punter/life-expectancy-how-does-a-countries-development-factors-affect-it-ef397ced579a

# Licensing, Authors, Acknowledgements
The Life_Expectancy_data csv dataset has been obtained from Kaggle: https://www.kaggle.com/kumarajarshi/life-expectancy-who
Credit for this dataset is given to the World Health Organisation who collected the data.
All code within this repository has been solely developed for this project and is available for public use. Functions developed with help from other sites are given credit within the function documentation.



